SHIP-0027: Image Abstraction Layer (#57)
shipwright-io/community: ships/0026-image-abstraction-layer.md

> ---

Reviewer: The number 26 is already chosen by https://github.com/shipwright-io/community/pull/53. Please use 27, also include a `SHIP-0027: ` prefix in the PR title.

Author: Done, thanks for the help.

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [docs](/docs/)

## Summary

Design the Kubernetes API types (CRDs) and create a minimal viable product for such an abstraction
layer.

### Non-Goals

At this stage to provide the integration with Shipwright’ builds is not a goal of this proposal,
this will need to be tackled once we have the basic types and functionality in place. To provide
Image storage for Container Images in the form of an integrated Image Registry inside the cluster
is also not part of the scope of this proposal.

## Proposal

The operator would leverage a _custom resource definition_ called Image. An Image represents an
image tag in a remote registry. For instance, an Image called `myapp-devel` may be created to keep
track of the image `quay.io/company/myapp:latest`. A Image _custom resource_ layout would look
like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: shipwright.io/v1alpha1
kind: Image
metadata:
  name: myapp-devel
  namespace: my-namespace
spec:

>   from: quay.io/company/myapp:latest

Reviewer: Where can one specify a pull secret for this image?

Author: I just realize you commented about this very same thing a little bit below. I gonna Resolve this one and keep the discussion going there. :+1:

  mirror: false
  insecure: false
```
The meaning of eachproperty in an `Image.Spec` is as follow:

| Property   | Description                                                                       |
| ---------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| from       | Indicates the source of the image (from where Tagger should import it)            |
| mirror     | Informs if the Image should be mirrored to another registry                       |

> | insecure   | Indicates that Tagger should skip tls verification during the image import/mirror |

Author: Well, you spotted a place where copy & pasta failed me miserably. I have already adjusted these markdown tables (I have copied them from the PoC repository).

When it comes to you actual question: I don't know. When you say "builders" what exactly do you mean ?

> | insecure   | Indicates that Tagger should skip tls verification during the image import/mirror |

Author: @imjasonh @otaviof can you shine some light here? Is there an "insecure" option (when pushing the resulting image to a registry) in a build or buildrun ?

@dmage please fix if I misunderstood your question.

> | insecure   | Indicates that Tagger should skip tls verification during the image import/mirror |

Author: I haven't found anything here:

https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/shipwright-io/build/pkg/apis/build/v1alpha1#Image

Once such a custom_ resource_ is created (with `kubectl create`, for example) the operator won’t
act on it immediately but it will instead wait until an ImageImport, referring to the created
Image object, is instantiated by the user.

An ImageImport object looks like:

```
apiVersion: shipwright.io/v1alpha1
kind: ImageImport
metadata:
  name: myapp-import-00
  namespace: my-namespace
Spec:
  targetImage: myapp-devel
  from: quay.io/company/myapp:latest
  mirror: false
  insecure: false
```

All Image properties also show up in an ImageImport object, so, if the user does not provide data
for these properties in the ImageImport the operator will use whatever is set in the Image instead.

> Follow a list of meaning for each property in an ImageImport.Spec:

Reviewer: Does that make sense ? Would either `targetImage` or the other three properties be a reasonable alternative?

| username   | Username                                                                          |
| password   | The password to be used                                                           |
| token      | The auth token to be used                                                         |
| insecure   | Allows access to insecure registries if set to "true"                             |
| repository | If set all images are going to be mirrored inside this registry repository        |

### Image status

The status field for a given Image should contain all its previously imported versions of the
same image sorted by import time. Follow below the proposed properties found in an Image `.status`
property and their meaning:

| Name              | Description                                                                |
| ----------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| hashReferences    | A list of all imported versions of the Image. Sorted by import time descending (the first item in this list is the last imported version) |
   
The property `.status.hashReferences` is a list of imported image versions, The operator would

> hold up to twenty five imports per image. Each item in the list is composed of the following

Reviewer: ;-)

```suggestion
hold up to 25 imports per image. Each item in the list is composed of the following
```

properties:

| Name           | Description  |
| -------------- | ------------ |

> | from           | Keeps a reference from where the image got imported |

Reviewer: Will this include the digest?

Author: No, what contains the digest is the `imageReference` property below. As the Image may have its "From" property changed in time it is useful, IMHO, to have recorded what the "From" was the moment of import. WDYT?

| imageReference | Where this reference points to (by hash), may point to the mirror registry in case of a mirrored Image |

### ImageImport status

On a ImageImport status, one would be able to find information about the import attempts executed
by the operator, it looks like:

| Name           | Description  |
| -------------- | ------------ |
| hashReference  | Once the import has succeeded this is populated with the data about the image. Properties for hashReference are equal to Image.Status.HashReferences above. This is what is copied into the Image.Status.HashReferences list. |
| importedAt     | A list of failures or successes during the ImageImport processing |

The properties for the object `.status.hashReference` are exactly the same as for the objects
inside `Image.Status.HashReferences`. As for importAttempts objects they contain the following
properties:

| Name    | Description                                                                          |
| ------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| when    | Date and time of the import attempt                                                  |

> | succeed | A boolean indicating if the import was successful or not                             |

Reviewer: Would this be rather a status (True, False, Unknown)?

Author: Yes ! You are absolutely right ! This should be a Condition inside the Status. I am going to address it.

Author: I have adjusted this EP to include a "Condition" property in the ImageImport status. PTAL.

| reason  | In case of failure (succeed = false), what was the error                             |

The operator must try to import multiple times the same ImageImport in case of failures. These
imports should implement exponential backoff to avoid “too many requests” from remote registries.
After ten failures the operator should stop trying to process the ImageImport.

### User Stories

As an operator I want to be able to create a reference by hash to an image hosted in a remote
registry so I can easily refer to it by its hash instead of by tag.

As an operator I want to be able to mirror an image in my registry so I can take ownership of it
and possibly gain some performance while pulling.

### Implementation Notes

To import images hosted in registries protected by authentication the operator would need to be
able to read docker credentials secrets that exist in the same namespace where the Image exists.
The idea is to mimic OpenShift’s Image Stream here: read all docker config secrets from the target

> namespace and use the appropriate one (if present).

Reviewer: I see, related to my point above. I am not sure if this implicity is a good idea. One can easily have multiple secrets for the same host that have access to different repositories under that container registry host. Though, not sure if that is realistic inside a single Kubernetes namespace.

Author: Not sure where your concern is, if I understand you right then we are covered by a [keyring](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/credentialprovider/secrets/secrets.go#L29) as used by k8s itself, no? Can you think in a scenario where such a keyring would fall short?
